Um, what I'm going to uh talk about
today is uh some some efforts that that
we and others have made to try to um
expand what I think of as significant
mind blindness that affects us because
of our evolutionary history and our
focus on particular kinds of minds. And
I'm going to spend uh the m the middle
part of the talk uh discussing results
that we have using the collective
intelligence of body cells as a model
system to understand a diverse
intelligence that lives in a weird space
that's hard for us to imagine and the
progress we've actually made in
communicating with that intelligence. So
it's kind of a case study for us. But
I'm also going to talk about some some
much much weirder things. Um if
anybody's uh interested in the in the
primary papers, the data sets, the
software, everything is here. And then
uh here's uh where I keep my own kind of
personal thoughts about what it all what
it all means. So I want to start off by
just reminding ourselves of uh something
that uh happened over history is that
prior to having a solid theory of
electromagnetism, we had uh static
electricity and we had lightning and we
had magnets and we had light and we all
thought those were different things.
Okay, we thought these were these were
completely different um kinds of uh
kinds of phenomena and uh and and we
were also unaware that um we actually
were only sensitive to a tiny part of
this spectrum. Uh what what a good
theory of electromagnetism did for us is
several things. First of all, it
revealed that all of these different
things are in fact manifestations of the
same thing and that it is a spectrum and
that the labels we put on this spectrum
are convenient, but they're for our
purposes. The underlying thing is a
continuum. And it allow us it allowed us
to develop technology driven by the
theory that uh now lets us interact with
this enormous range of of things in the
universe around us to which we were
previously basically completely blind
and that allows us to to make
applications that improve quality of
life. So I want to argue that this this
this idea the idea of a unification that
reveals a spectrum and an underlying uh
symmetry to uh to to seemingly disparate
phenomena is in fact uh the the exact
way we should start thinking about uh
diverse kinds of minds. So in my group
what I would like to do is to develop a
framework that helps us to recognize and
ethically relate to a very wide range of
beings. And so not just the the primates
and birds and maybe an octopus or a
whale that that conventionally we think
about, but also some really weird
biologicals such as colonial organisms
and swarms, synthetic new life forms, uh
AIs, whether robotic or or purely
software and sometime someday maybe
exobiological alien entities and some
even very weird things that I I probably
won't have time to really talk about
today which aren't aren't even
conventionally conventional physical
objects. And I think what we have here
is exactly this kind of spectrum where
we uh we have names for different types
of agents along the spectrum all the way
from passive matter and I'm not sure
there is any such thing but but but we
tend to think of uh the kinds of things
that physics studies as sort of passive
dumb materials all the way up to
whatever humans are with their
metacognitive uh abilities and and
everything in between. And so and so
what I'm interested in are uh theories
of transformation and change not not um
sort of sharp categories uh but but
actually how how things scale along this
continuum and and all the details are
here. One thing one thing to remember is
that as as we as we uh study these kinds
of things uh what what I think we are
working up along is this this kind of uh
spectrum where things get progressively
weirder. you know, as you as you start
to leave this this this conventional uh
area, the kinds of agents that we think
about get get stranger and stranger. And
the one one other precedent that we have
is in the discovery of of numbers,
right? So originally we had the counting
numbers and then somebody invented zero
and then negative numbers and then
eventually people figured out that you
know even the rationals weren't the the
limit of things and and and so on. And
what's important here is that each one
of these uh expansions required a
conceptual leap. It required us to break
prior categories that that we thought
define what is essential about numbers.
Uh it actually was quite disturbing. So
lots of people died for example uh when
when um when irrationals were discovered
like this this this poor guyus uh you
know was either killed or or or drowned
on his own from the horror of of of this
kind of thing. And we just need to
remember that that expanding these
categories is not trivial. Uh it's it's
often painful. Um and the ability to
recognize other uh other kinds of things
that didn't fit your previous category
is in in order so that you can do
something useful with them and in in the
context of what we're talking about now,
which is other types of beings actually
have some sort of um active
compassionate relationship with them is
uh is not easy. We as humans are really
primed to recognize this kind of thing.
So, so here's this uh Oscar-winning
performance where where this this little
uh squirrel-like creature sets up a
little accident scene here, right? So,
he puts it right on the neck. He he
knows what his owners he's got a very
good theory of mind. He knows what the
owners are looking for um in terms of
paying attention to him. He's going to
check in a minute to see whether
anybody's watching, right? So, so, so,
so these kinds of things, it's very easy
for us to understand that that that
there's a mind here and and so on. And
that's because they operate at the same
spatio temporal scale. They operate
operate within the same space as we do.
They have roughly similar biological
goals. And so things that are driven by
brains especially especially mammals not
really problematic usually. Um although
there are some there are some weird
situations. For example uh you know we
we have theories of mapping of functions
onto brain structure and so on. And yet
there are clinical cases and um Karina
Kaufman and I reviewed it in this in
this paper. there are cases where
individuals have radically reduced
amounts of brain tissue despite normal
or even uh above normal performance. So
so even even that's not simple that you
know the mapping between between brain
and performance even even that's not
easy but um in order to to to really
understand uh what what we are and and
how we come to be as as embodied agents
we need to look at our our origins both
evolutionarily and developmentally. So
all of us start life as a little blob of
chemistry and physics. So here's an
unfertilized oasite. Um through the
incredible process of embryogenesis, we
become a fodder for either behavioral
science or maybe psychoanalysis and and
and other deeper kinds of things. Um one
thing developmental biology shows us is
that there is no magic uh kind of bright
line at which at which physics ticks
over to psychology. There is no there is
no special place where that happens.
It's a continuous gradual process and
and it's really important to be able to
understand that process. Uh and by the
way, this is not the end of the road
because there are other processes that
can happen uh afterwards including a
dissociative disorder known as cancer.
I'll talk about that in a minute. And
really other very strange things such as
um uh your cells, for example, after the
death of the body, your cells continuing
their life in in a totally novel
embodiment such as these anthrobots that
I'm going to show you in a minute. And
it's also important to note that uh even
even even the notion of an embryo isn't
simple because if you look at uh an
early blastoaderm so let's say there's a
couple of hundred thousand cells here
and you say well there's an embryo. What
what are you actually counting when you
say there's one embryo? What is there
one of? Well what there's one of is
alignment. What what what there's one of
is a story that all of the cells have
bought into a self model that guides
their movement in anatomical space in
the space of possible anatomical
configurations. And the reason there's
one embryo is because all the cells
agree that is where they're going. If
you were to um and I used to do this as
in in duck embryos as a graduate
student. If you take a little needle and
you put some scratches in this plaster,
each one of these islands doesn't feel
the presence of the others. And so they
align among themselves. They decide
they're the embryo, but they all do it.
And this is how you get twins and
triplets and and things like this. Um
that means that the number of
individuals inside an an embryionic uh
medium is not determined. It's not
certainly not set by genetics. It could
be anywhere from zero to probably half a
dozen or more in a standard blaster. And
so how many uh how many actual uh
individuals or cells can emerge from
that medium is not obvious. And it's a
it's a physiological outcome uh that
that shares actually a lot of both
mechanistic and uh functional
similarities with issues of
individuation in the cognitive sense. So
things like split brain patients,
dissociative identity disorders u you
know how many how many individuals are
within a given set of real estate in the
brain is is is and how many can actually
fit what's the maximum carrying
capacity. We know this for standard
computation. We do not know how to how
to calculate this for neural substrates
and uh so so it's incre it's incredibly
dynamic process self-making literally
selfmaking um is is a very dynamic
process and it's driven by this sort of
thing. This is this is what we're all
made of. This is a single cell. Now this
is a free living organism but but you
get the idea. It's a single cell.
There's no brain. There's no nervous
system. Uh there is however great
competency in managing its own tiny
little cognitive lyone. the
spatiotemporal uh region of goals that
it can pursue is is small but but it's
very good at at doing what it what it
needs to do and even this I mean a lot
of people are now catching on that that
cells have a kind of kind of
intelligence and competency and whatever
but but it's not just that this goes
down to the cell level no it's it goes
far beyond that because even the
chemical material inside of that cell
not the cell itself not the nucleus not
any of that but uh but but but just the
uh chemical pathways for example gene
regulatory networks or other other
chemical pathways just from the way the
math works they are themselves capable
of at least six different kinds of
learning including Pvloian conditioning
you don't need anything else just just a
set of interacting chemicals is already
potentially capable of several different
kinds of learning and so and so already
not not only are we collective
intelligences made of cells but actually
the cells themselves are collective
intelligence made up of components that
do all kinds of interesting things that
I don't have I'm going to talk about
today but um we are for example in our
lab taking advantage of the ability of
these molecular networks to learn uh to
to um make applications such as drug
conditioning and things like that. So um
we we our our body is a multiscale
competency architecture every level from
the molecular networks on up is a kind
of uh agent that solves problems in in
various weird uh spaces. Okay. And
because because of our uh of our
evolutionary firmware, we are pretty
good at recognizing intelligence in
three-dimensional space, you know, we're
we're obsessed with with the 3D world
because of our our our vision and uh
medium-sized objects moving at medium
speeds like like birds and and things
like this. We we can we can sort of pick
that up. But uh biology uh exploits
intelligence and uh and and and
goal-directed navigation in lots of
different spaces. So, the space of
possible gene expressions, the space of
possible physiological states, and the
one we're going to talk about most is
the anatomical morphus space. Um, this
this this thing that's essential for
intelligence, this perception action
loop happens in all kinds of other
spaces that are very difficult for us to
recognize. This has lots of implications
for things like uh like AIs and and
various hybrid hybrids and uh organoids
and things where people look at them and
say, "Well, this is not embodied. It
just sits there. doesn't move in the
physical world, right? But the physical
world is not the only world where you
can do this critical perception action
loop. And so what I mean by anatomical
intelligence, I don't just mean
complexity. Uh and I don't even just
mean reliability. I mean problem
solving. And so here's a very simple
example of a goal- directed system. So
you have this this axelottle. They are
incredibly regenerative. They can they
can restore most of their body parts. If
it loses a limb anywhere along this
axis, the cells immediately detect that
they've been deviated from their target
state. They will work really hard to get
back there. And then the most amazing
thing of all, they stop when they're
done. When do they stop? They stop when
a correct uh XL limb has formed. So, so
this is an example of a very simple
homeostatic process. You the system has
a goal. You deviated from that goal. It
expends lots of energy to get there and
then it stops. But, but this ability to
and in fact this it will work no matter
where you cut. it makes exactly the
right steps from here to there. So, so
it can regain its position in that
anatomical space it navigates. But this
is not just about damage. Uh it leads to
that that that incredible plasticity
leads to phenomena like this. If if we
make this tadpole with no primary eyes,
this is a tadpole of the frog. Here's
the mouth. Here are the nostrils, the
brain, the tail. So, if we make a
tadpole with no primary eyes, but we put
an eye on its tail. And um I'll show you
in a minute how how we can do that. Uh
what happens is that that eye makes a
single optic nerve. The optic nerve does
not go to the brain. Sometimes it
synapses on the spinal cord here,
sometimes to the gut, sometimes nowhere
at all. And these animals can see
perfectly well. How do we know? Because
we built a device that trains them,
automatically trains them on visual
cues, and we can show that they learn
for visual assays. And this is amazing.
Why do you not need additional rounds of
evolutionary adaptation here? You've got
an animal with a radically different
sensory motor architecture. The eyes
connected to the spinal cord or some
other organism, some other organ. Why
why does this just work, you know, on on
the on out of the box? And that's
because every instance of embryogenesis
or regeneration uh is is or remodeling
or metamorphosis is is not a hardwired
process driven by the chemistry of
genetics. What it is is a
problem-solving process that um takes
place when uh when when an active agent
interprets the information that it has,
including its genetic affordances and
everything else. So it gives rise to
this this this incredible plasticity uh
that that we're going to look at the
implications of this momentarily. So
what we'd like to know is how does all
this work right? So so what's the
cognitive glue that binds individual
competent subunits like cells and in
fact molecular networks into cells into
tissues organs and so on. What what is
the what are the mechanisms and policies
that allow these things to work together
and and and embody a higher order
individual that knows things that its
parts don't know? Well, uh we know how
how this works in um in uh in in in our
bodies in the in the as far as cognition
is concerned. The cognitive glue that
binds individual neurons together uh
into us is is electrophysiology or
bioelectricity. It's the uh the
electrical networking of the cells in
your brain that allow us to know things
that our neurons don't know and and and
so on. Um well it turns out that uh that
that in particular uh is is is a scheme
that evolution had had discovered long
before there were brains and muscles and
things like that. Uh using electricity
to bind to bind things together into a
larger scale collective intelligence
goes back to at least um uh bacterial
biohilms. very ancient and and more more
generally I don't have time to talk
about this but but more generally um
what evolution I think has done is to
pivot some of the same navigational
tricks uh across all kinds of spaces as
as life got more complex so from
metabolic spaces physiological spaces
gene expression spaces eventually
multisellularity and you get anatomical
morphus space then muscles and brains
appear and you've got 3D behavioral
space and then eventually linguistic
spaces and who knows what else but but
the interesting thing here is that uh
what we what what our what our brains
are using to uh embody conventional
cognition is exactly the same molecular
mechanisms meaning ion channels,
electrical synapses and
neurotransmitters. Exactly the same
machinery as the collective intelligence
of the body uses to make anatomical
decisions. And so this is this is this
is interesting. I don't plan to talk
about consciousness too much in this
talk, but just just um when when I when
I give these kinds of talks, I remind
people that when you attribute
consciousness to other humans that
you're talking to or other other beings,
you typically use one of three criteria.
Either you're looking at mechanisms. You
say, "Hey, they use the same mechanisms
that I use and I'm conscious, so
therefore they must be too." Or you're
looking at behavior, so some sort of
creative problem solving or something,
and you say, "Okay, this is this is a
sign of cognition and int and
consciousness." or you're looking at
evolutionary continuity. You say, "Well,
they're on the same evolutionary stream
and therefore they they must have had it
too." If if you like any of these
criteria, then you have to take very
seriously the idea that every uh
structure in your body potentially has
some sort of likely nonverbal and so you
don't hear from it, but but some some
level of conscious experience because it
fulfills all of the criteria that we
normally use to acquire to attribute
consciousness to each other. So, uh,
what we're interested in is
understanding, okay, if if we're going
to use the collective intelligence of
morphagenesis as, uh, as a model system,
one of the things we'd like to do is to
communicate with it. And, um, in order
to do that, the first thing we developed
were some tools to, uh, basically read
the information content of its mind. And
so, so basically to read out the
electrical activities the way that uh,
neuroscientists read out the uh, the
states of the brain. And we developed a
fluorescent die technology that allows
us so so here are a bunch of cells in a
dish deciding whether they should be a
collective or not. Here are some cells
in an early frog embryo. So these are
not models. This is this is real real
data in time lapse and you can see you
can see um all the electrophysiology
that goes on as these cells figure out
who's going to be left who's going to be
right anterior posterior and so on. So
we have all kinds of computational
methods that we've developed to uh to to
to model this phenomena and to
understand how it can underly memories
and and and large scale circuits that do
pattern completion which is basically
regeneration right you lose you lose a
part of the body and then you can you
can sort of complete that pattern later.
So, so we have all kinds of uh
simulations. Um, I want to show you some
of these patterns. Not only do these uh
electrical patterns serve as a kind of
uh cognitive glue to bind cells together
into a a single uh body. And so here we
have this is a frog embryo putting its
face together. And so this is one frame
from that video. We call this the
electric face because what you see here
is that before uh the gene expression
and the cell behaviors that lead to
forming a face. This is the memory that
you can read out of what it's planning
to build. So here's where the eye is
going to go. Here's where the mouth is
going to go. Here are some plao
structures. So um so so the biomectric
stores a memory of what the thing is
going to build. But it's also a
cognitive glue across individuals. So
here you can see when I uh when when we
poke this one, these two find out about
this in short order. And the same thing
here. You poke this embryo, there's a
wave that that goes. These these are
each one of these is is a whole embryo.
These are not cells, these are whole
embryos. So So you can see that there's
communication within and communication
between individuals. They're sitting in
an aquous medium, which is how the wave
can can propagate. And then here are
just a bunch of cells where you can see
the incredibly complex electrical
activity that uh that that they're able
to drive. Okay. So, so we're able to
read these things. Now, if you're going
to communicate, you can't just listen.
You have to be able to convey messages,
too. And so, this is just one example. I
could show you hours of this kind of
stuff where what we can do is say to
some some cells that are going to
normally make a gut, we can give them
the message that says make an eye. And
that message is encoded electrically. We
introduce it using ion channel,
potassium channels um in uh encoded by
RNA that make a little voltage gradient
that looks just like that spot that I
showed you a minute ago. And sure
enough, the cells get the message and
they make an eye. Now, there's something
very important here, which is that when
I'm talking to you all, I don't need to
worry about reaching in and making sure
that all your synaptic connections are
doing the right biochemical things so
that you remember what I'm saying. You
are going to take care of all of that
because you're a multiscale cognitive
system. All I need to do is give you
prompts with a very thin linguistic
interface uh and then you will do all
the hard work of arranging the internals
of your brain to uh to to to act
accordingly. The same thing is true
here. We provide a very simple signal.
It's a prompt. It says make an eye. We
don't tell the cells what to do. We
don't tell which genes to turn on and
off. We don't talk to the stem cells. We
in fact we have no idea how to actually
make an eye any more than I have any
idea of how to manipulate your synapses
so that you remember what I'm saying. Uh
the system takes care of all of that
because it is a multiscale cognitive
agent that takes high level uh
information and it handles all the stuff
downstream including if we only get a
few cells here they will do the job of
telling their neighbor. So the blue ones
are the ones that we injected. All of
this other stuff, this lens that's
sitting out in the in the flank of a
temple, uh we didn't touch any of those
cells. These cells told those cells what
to do. They said they said, "You need to
participate with us to make this thing
because there's not enough of us to make
to uh and and by the way, these other
cells resist. They have a different
vision of the future that they were
following before. And we can actually
track the communication that goes back
and forth and to see who wins because
it's a cancer suppression mechanism.
Cells don't just pick up whatever
message you happen to give them. They
they resist. they have their own idea of
of of what they should be doing. So it's
it's really all all this this
morphagenesis um is a is a constant
battle of world views. It's a battle of
models uh and and the cell the cell
collectives have to decide which which
uh which model of the future they're
going to they're going to go with.
Another thing you can do um with this
interface is to actually change the
scale the the size of the self. In other
words, the scale of the cognitive ly
cone or the size of the goals that it
can pursue. So, so again the um
individual cells have little tiny
cognitive lyones and they remember very
simple goals like hunger level or pH or
things like that and then that's what
they pursue their their homeostatic set
points or very simple um things like
that. Um, but these kinds of these kinds
of for example morphagenetic systems
have huge grandiose goals like building
a limb and no individual cell knows what
a what a finger is or how many fingers
you're supposed to have but the
collective absolutely does and you know
that because if you try to deviate it
from it you'll see you'll see that it
knows what the set point is. So, so
there's this there's this question, can
we can we uh show how connecting cells
into a larger network allows them to
have larger goals? The the how how do
you expand the the size of the cognitive
lone? And this this kind of weird way of
thinking about it um uh has has
therapeutic benefits. So, we we we try
to um show some kind of practical
implications for all this strange stuff
that that we say so that other people
can see why why it's useful. To think
about it this way, um here's a a human
oagene injected into a tadpole. it
normally makes a tumor. You can track
why. It's because the Anka genes make
the cells disconnect electrically from
the rest of the network. When they do
that, as far as they're concerned, the
rest of the body is just external
environment. So, uh it's not that
they're more selfish is that they have
smaller selves, the border between self
and world shrinks. And whereas before it
was part of this big collective that
could entertain thoughts about, you
know, building a proper the skin and
muscle and whatever, now it's just an
amoeba doing its thing. So, metastasis.
But what you can do is uh forcibly
reconnect these cells to the collective.
And we've done that here. And if you do
that, the anka protein is still there.
It's labeled in red. So you can see it's
blazingly expressed. This is the same
animal, but there's no tumor. And we
didn't kill the cells. We didn't fix the
genetic lesion. Uh we didn't do any of
that. What we did do is force the cells
to be part of this electrical network
where it is now part of a larger self
with larger goals with uh that working
on anatomical things instead of being an
amoeba in a in an environment. So, so,
so, so just to kind of recap what I've
showed you is that this this biological
interface allows you to um detect,
reset, and communicate with a very
unconventional collective intelligence.
And what it does uh is uh think about
how to move a an anatomical
configuration through the space of
anatomical possibilities. And if we had
more time, I could show you a whole
bunch of um different problem solving uh
kind of competencies that it has along
those lines. So uh all of this kind of
way of thinking about it suggests to me
a different kind of biio medicine. So
everything that we do today is mostly
bottom up. It's focused on the hardware
here. Um if we actually focus not only
not only on the software but actually on
the uh intelligence inside the agential
material of life, you end up with all
kinds of applications. Most of this I
didn't get to show you uh as far as
training cells and tissues and top down
communication via via electrosuticals
and things like that. And so I I think
um the future future medicine is not
going to look like chemistry. It's going
to look a lot more like a kind of
sematic psychiatry. Bioelectrics is one
interface layer. No doubt there are
others. There are you know biophotons
and other other things that probably
will be developed but but I think the
most well-developed at this point uh is
bioelect electricity. Uh so now we can
ask okay so so if the future of all of
this is really the study of patterns
it's the study of patterns of thought
and behavior that occur in these weird
media such as um such as the electrical
networks of your body. Where do these
patterns come from? And the standard
answer in biology is well they come from
two places. Uh biologists love love love
two um kinds of explanations for things.
One is history. In other words, of a
history of selection. The pattern is
what it is because everything else died
out and this is what we have now. So, in
other words, there's a historical
explanation for why this pattern, not
some other pattern. And the other thing
um the biologists like is um is physics.
In other words, patterns are constrained
by by physical effects uh and and the
properties of the physical world. And
so, some of some of those patterns just
come from the from the physics. So um
what's what's interesting though is that
there are some patterns and and we can
start with the ones studied by
mathematicians that have neither a
genetic nor an environmental
explanation. In other words, this this
thing that you're looking at here and
then here are some videos of what happen
what the pattern actually looks like
when you start tweaking the formula.
This is this is a very simple function
in complex number z. So z cub plus 7 for
example. If you it's if you do something
called a Halley plot where it's a very
simple algorithm for plotting the roots
of this uh and and how the roots behave
of this function you get this amazing
complex pattern um doesn't hurt that
it's kind of very organic looking which
is why why I use this example but what's
salient here is that there's a tiny seed
it it encodes a very complex uh a very
rich kind of structure and if you wanted
to explain why it looks like this there
are no facts of the physical world that
explain it there is nothing in the
history of of the physics of the
universe that explains why this is the
way it is. The explanation does not come
from the physical world. You cannot
tweak any of the con um you know the the
constants of of uh the universe at the
beginning of the big bang and get a
different pattern out of this. It it is
an extra thing that uh is is distinct
from information you get from your
genetic lineage and information you get
from your physical environment. And
there are plenty of patterns like this
and like this and like this in that
space as you as you play with these
kinds of uh you play with these kinds of
things. So um so so now now we can start
to ask okay so what does this have to do
with biology? Could we could we find any
uh living forms without a large scale
history? In other words, if biologists
will say that that whatever form you
have is driven by your evolutionary
history. Are there any form any beings
that that are picking up forms that
cannot be explained in this way? So, I'm
going to show you just one. Um, this is
uh something called an anthrobot. If I
if I showed it to you for the first
time, you may have already seen this. If
you saw this for the first time, you
might be tempted to guess that this is
some sort of primitive organism that we
picked up at the bottom of a pond
somewhere. You might take a guess about
its genome. You might think that, well,
this will have an early genome of of an
early mezzone, for example. If you were
actually sequence this genome, you would
find out that it's 100% homo sapiens.
These are these anthropots are self
assembled from adult human cells. Uh
they they come from tracheal epithelia
that human patients donate. Some of
these patients um are alive and well
when they donate this, some are not. So
for those that are not, this is a weird
kind of life after death where these um
these cells self assemble into a motile
little organism. It matches no stage of
human of normal human development. you
uh you would you would not be able to
guess from the human genome that that
this is what you would get. Actually,
you wouldn't even guess from the genome
that that the human body is what you
would get, but but you certainly
wouldn't wouldn't know this. Um so, um
so it's interesting what what capacities
does this creature have? It's never
existed on Earth before. Um there have
never been any anthropots. There's never
been any selection to have to be a good
anthrobot. What can it do? And and where
do those patterns come from? Well, one
thing it can do if you plate a bunch of
a bunch of human neurons on a dish and
make a big scratch through them like
this, one thing you'll find is that
these these anthrobots cluster in what
we call a superbot. So, they make this
this like pileup and then what they do
is over the next four days they start
healing the wound. And so, if you lift
it up, this is what you see. They're
sitting there knitting across the gap.
Okay? Now who who would have thought
that your tracheal cells which sit there
in your airway for long periods of time
dealing with dust particles and whatnot
that given the opportunity to reboot
their selfhood to reboot their
multisellularity would go on and make
this kind of self-motile thing that by
the way has the ability to heal of your
body. So so obviously this is a
technology um that we're developing for
in the body repair. It's made of your
own cells. You won't need
immunosuppression once we figure out how
to ask these cells to do the things we
want them to do. Uh this is this is all
kinds of useful technology. But the
other important thing about this is that
uh first first of all they have four
different discrete behaviors and you can
draw an ethoggram of those transition
states between those behaviors like you
would in any animal. Um uh they have a
drastically remodeled transcriptto. What
I mean by that is this this volcano plot
shows different gene genes that they
express differently than the tissue they
came from. Each one of these red red uh
genes there are about 9,000 of them. So
almost half the genome is differently
expressed than it is in that tissue. So
when we say why do humans look the way
they look and and have certain
properties, you say, well it's the human
genome. Yeah, the same genome can also
make this. And if you do enable them to
make this and and we don't, you know, we
don't edit the genome. There's no weird
SC nanom materials. There are no
scaffolds, no synthetic biology
circuits. The cells do all the work.
when they do this, they will pick and
choose what they express from their
genome, about half of them, to be in a
completely different uh kind of form and
function. So, okay. So, just to just to
kind of end here, I want to say a couple
of quick things. Um the f the first
thing and so this is kind of the most um
uh
um the the the latest and the most uh
kind of uh exploratory aspect of of all
this work is that I I see all of this
stuff the zenobots that we build the
anthrobots the chimeas all all the
things that we make I see them as
exploration vehicles. I see them as
enabling a systematic mapping of uh the
relationship between the interfaces that
we make which are the physical objects.
So I think all physical objects
including cells and embryos and bodies
and robots and uh everything all of
these things are physical um uh are
interfaces or pointers into a space of
pattern. Mathematicians have known this
for a long time. They study kind of one
region of that space and there's all
kinds of truths and patterns of of
mathematical objects that don't come
from the physical world. But I actually
think it's a much richer space and it
contains other very high agency patterns
that we recognize as kinds of minds and
everything everything that we do are is
is basically poking holes in this in
this uh kind of u separation between the
interfaces and the patterns that that
then ingress through through these uh
through these interfaces. And so, and so
it's just the very last thing I'll say
is lest we get too smug about our
ability to access this space because,
you know, among us are certain geniuses
that can perceive incredible um
incredible truths uh and and works of
art and and and literature and so on.
And so they're picking out right they're
picking out things out of that space and
letting them come into the come into the
world. Um less less we think that this
is some kind of a a a human capability.
I will just point out that first of all
uh there are no humans as a sharp
category. So we are at the center of all
kinds of continua both developmentally
evolutionarily whatever you think that
humans are or can do you have to have a
story for where did it sort of uh evol
where does it does it um come from and
how does it scale in fact both with
biological changes and technological
changes this again the standard human
category becomes extremely um diffuse
because of the plasticity of life that
allows us to uh that that allows it to
inter be interoperable with all kinds of
modifications and this this sort of
thing if if you in the audience if if
you're a therapist um or you're
interested in the crisis meaning and
helping people through this and and so
on you've got a set of some constituents
that count on you for help you really
have to start thinking about here here
are your here are your patients of the
future okay this is you know the
standard human patient is is not enough
there are going to be all kinds of
interesting new beings with all kinds of
needs that we are going to have to um uh
address in some way some of these will
have the same existential concerns as us
some will have very different um
concerns. I think that because of this
interoperability, all natural life is a
tiny corner of this option space and
that pretty much every combination of
evolved uh material design material
software um and these these patterns
that you can't forget about as an
ingredient is some kind of you know
there will be hybrids and cyborgs and
just every possible kind of being that
we are going to have to enter some sort
of ethical synth symbiosis with and um
and then the last thing I'll I'll whoops
the last thing I'll say is just this
that even that that there's some serious
humility warranted in all of this
because a lot of people think that a
it's complexity that that makes all this
work or that b there's something special
about um the biological material and and
this kind of trial and error process of
evolution and um our work and again I
don't have time to get into the details
but even looking at deterministic
extremely simple things that that people
that computer scientists study like
sorting algorithms already you see that
yeah it does the thing the algor
algorithm tells it to do. But if you
know how to look, you also find it doing
all kinds of interesting side quests
that the algorithm does not ask them to
do that are in fact kinds of uh that are
things that you would recognize as
aspects of cognition. Very minimal, but
yet there they are. And so and so I
really think this goes all the way down
this ability to have um the freedom to
express patterns from that space that
are not fully uh determined by the
physics of your world or the algorithms
that that we think uh you are following
uh it is always richer than that even in
extremely simple systems and so just
just to remind us again you know McGreet
was telling us that that our formal
models are not the thing itself and I
would say the same thing you know
there's a lot of organis thinkers who
are down on computationalism and they
say living things aren't aren't
machines. They say right nothing is a
machine because a machine is a formal
model that humans have defined to uh to
handle certain aspects of what physical
objects do in the world and it doesn't
fully uh describe even the simplest
kinds of systems never mind of course
the biological systems so nothing is a
machine but some things look like the
machines like a machine to lazy
observers and I think for exactly the
same reason that the rules of
biochemistry don't encompass the story
of the human mind formal models of
algorithms and materials do not
encompass the story of minimal beings.
So really I think we have to we have to
get much wider in our perception of what
we can relate with. So um I'll just uh
I'm going to end here and just thank uh
the people who uh did the work that I
showed you. Here are some uh postocs and
students and collaborators in our lab
and um disclosures. There are three
companies that have spun off from from
the work that we do and of course thank
our funders and and the model systems
because they've done the most hard work
in teaching us about this stuff. So,
thank you so much and I'll stop